 

ĀGRĀYAṆA

the revered preceptor of Droṇa. (Ślokas 67 and 68,
Chapter 94, Droṇa Parva, M.B.).

ĀGRĀYAṆA. The fourth son of the Agni, Bhānu.
(Śloka 13, Chapter 221, Vana Parva, M.B.).

ĀGREYA. A country conquered by Karṇa. (Ślokas 19-
21, Chapter 254, Vana Parva, M.B.).

ĀHAVANĪYA. An agni. (M.B., Ādi Parva, Chapter
74, Verse 67).

ĀHUKA. A king of Yadu Vaṁśa. He was the father of
Ugrasena, the father of Kaṁsa. (Some Purāṇas say
that Āhuka and Ugrasena were the names of the same
person). For genealogy, see “YADU VAṀŚŠA”.. In M.B.,
Sabhā Parva, Chapter 14, Verse 33, we find that
Akrūra had married Sutanū, the daughter of Āhuka.
Āhuka had a hundred sons. (M.B., Sabhā Parva, Chapter
14, Verse 56). There were constant quarrels betwcen
Āhuka and Akrūra. (M.B., Śānti Parva, Chapter 81,
Verses 8-11).

ĀHUTI. A Kṣatriya King. Śrī Kṛṣṇa defeated this King
in the city called Jārūthī. (M.B., Vana Parva, Chapter
12, Verse 30).

ĀJAGARA. An ascetic. Śānti Parva of Mahābhārata in
its 179th Chapter states that Prahlāda conversed with
this sage.

ĀJAGARA PARVA. A sub-division of the Vana Parva
of Mahābhārata. (See under M.B.).

ĀJAGARAVRATA. The vrata practised by the sage,
Ajagara. ( A vrata is a predetermined course of action
which is followed with continued persistence ). In his
own words it is the following : “If I get a grand feast
I will accept it but I will go without food for days
together if I do not get any food at all. People used to
feed me well sometimes, sometimes a little and some-
times not at all. I will eat vegetables and cakes some-
times. J will eat meat and any kind of food. I will lie on
soft bed or on bare earth sometimcs and in big houses
if I get the chance. I will wear costly clothes if I get
them or I will wear dried leaves and animal skins. If
I get food from yāgaśālās I will never refuse it, but I
will never go seeking for it.³ (Ślokas 19-25, Chapter
179, Śānti Parva, M.B. ).

ĀJAGAVA. The bow of Māndhātā_and Pṛthu and the
Gāṇḍīva of Arjuna bear the name Ājagava. (Ślokas 33
and 34, Chapter 126, Vana Parva; Śloka 94, Chapter
145, Droṇa Parva, M.B. and Chapter 13, Aṁśam 1 of
Viṣṇu Purāṇa) .

ĀJAMĪḌHA. A king born of the family of Ajamīḍha.

ĀJĀNEYA. A species of good horses. (Śloka 10, Chap-
ter 270, Vana Parva, M.B.).

ĀJYAPA(S). A community of Pitṛs belonging to the
dynasty of Pulaha. They are called so because they
drink during yāgas the ghee made out of goats milk
(Ājyam) (Matsya Purāṇa). They live in the land of
Kardama Prajāpati. Their daughter Virajā is the wife
of Nahuṣa. (Śṛṣṭi Khaṇḍa, Padma Purāṇa).

ĀKARṢA. People living in the land named Ākarṣa are
called Ākarṣas. (Śloka 11, Chapter 34, Sabhā Parva,

M.B.).

ĀKK-JANANI. Holes made on the walls of a Fort.
Bullets are sent out fiom the fort through these holes.
ĀKAṬHA. Son of Maṅkaṇa. He was a great devotee
of Śiva and once when his house was burnt completely
the idol of Śiva inside his house was partially destroyed.
Worried much over this loss Ākatha was about to give
a portion of his body also to the flames when Śiva

87 ĀNA II

appeared before him and blessed him. (Pātāla Khaṇḍa,
Padma Purāṇa) .

ĀKROŚA. A king of ancient Bhārata. He was king over
the land of Mahottha. Nakula conquered him during
his victory march. (Ślokas 5 and 6, Chapter 32, Sabhā
Parva, M.B.).

ÃKRṚ̥TI. A king of ancient Bhārata. This king ruled
over the land of Saurāṣṭra. (Śloka 61, Chapter 31,
Sabhā Parva, M.B.).

ĀKṚTIPUTRA. Ruciparvā, son of Ākṛti. He fought on
the side of the Pāṇḍavas and was killed by Bhagadatta.
(ŚIokas 40 to 47, Chapter 27, Droṇa Parva, M.B.).

ĀKŪTI._ Wife of Ruciprajāpati. Brahmā’s son Svāyam-
bhuva Manu got of his wife Śatarūpā two sons Priya-
vrata and Uttānapāda and two daughters Prasūti and
Ākūtiī. Prasūti was married to Dakṣaprajāpati and
Ākūti to Ruciprajāpati. Ākūti delivered twins named
Yajña, a son, and Dakṣiṇā, a daughter. (Chapter 7,
Vaṁśam ḻ, Viṣṇu Purāṇa).

ĀLAJĀLA. See under “YAMAJIHVA”.

ALAMBA. An ancient sage. He flourished in Yudhiṣ-
ṭhira’s court. (M.B., Sabhā Parva, Chapter 5, Verse 5)).

ĀLAMBĀYANA. A comrade of Indra. (M.B., Anu-
śāsana Parva, Chapter 13, Verse 15).

ĀÃLVÃR. See the word NAMMALVĀR.

ĀÃMA. See under AVATĀRA.

ĀÃMARATHA. A place in ancient Bhārata. (Śloka 54,
Chapter 9, Bhīṣma Parva, M.B.).

ĀÃNA I. (A Malayalam word meaning clephant). Bhāga-
vata relates the story of how Indradyumna became
an clephant by the curse of Agastya. (Sec under Indra-
dyumna) .

ĀNĀ II. ‘(Elephant). Vālmīkī Rāmāyaṇa narrates the
origin of elephants thus: ‘““Kaśyapa was born to Marīci,
son of Brahmā. Kaśyapa marricd the daughters, Aditi,
Diti, Danu, Kālikā, Tāmrā, Krodhavaśā, Manu and
Analā, of Dakṣaprajāpati. Of these Krodhavaśā gave
birth to ten girls, Mrṛgī, Mṛgamadā, Harī, Bhadramatā,
Mātaṅgī, Śārdūlī, Śvetā, Surabhi, Surasā, and Kadrū.
Elephants were born as the sons of Mātaṅgī. (Sarga 14,
Araṇya Kāṇḍa, Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa.) .

There is a story in the Mahābhārata to explain why the
tongue of the clephant is curved inside. ‘“Bhṛgu Maharṣi
cursed Agni and greatly dejeeted over this he dis-
appeared from public and hid somewhere. The Devas
started scarching for him and it was an elephant that
showed the devas the hiding place of Agni. Agni then
cursed the elephants and said that thereafter all the
elephants would have their tongues curved inside. (Śloka
36, Chapter 85, Anuśāsana Parva, M.B.)).

The signs of goed elephants and the trcatment to be
accorded to sick ones are dctailed in Agni Purāṇa.
‘“‘Elephants with long trunks and heavy breathing be-
long to the top class and they will possess great endu-
rance power. Those who have nails cighteon or twenty
in number and who beeame turbulent during winter
belong to a superior class. Those ones whose right
tusks are a bit raised, whose cry is stentorian as that of
thunder whose ears are very big and whose skins are
spotted are the best of the species. Other varieties espe-
cially the dwarfish type and she-elephants in the carly
stage of pregnancy are not good and not fit to be tamed.
Elephants who have Varṇa, Sattva, Bala, Rūpa, Kānti,
Śarīraguṇa and Vega will conquer enemics in a battle;
there is no doubt about it. Elephants are an ornament
